---
layout: post
title:  "Brando Brown Canem Vult"
ref: brando
date: 2017-11-04
categories: causa TPRS libri
lang: english
type: reviews
---

<div class="side-box">
  <h4>TL;DR</h4>
  <ul>
    <li>Awesome book! But the publishers did a rubbish job on the
    layout.</li>
    <li>Authors: Carol Gaab & Justin Slocum Bailey</li>
    <li>Publisher: <a href="https://fluencymatters.com">Fluency Matters</a></li>
    <li>Released: 2016</li>
    <li>Words: 3700</li>
    <li>Unique Words: 125</li>
    <li>Teaching Resources Available: Yes</li>
    <li><a href="https://fluencymatters.com/product/brando-brown-canem-vult-latin-novel">Where to Buy</a></li>
    <li><a href="https://tprs-uploads.s3-accelerate.amazonaws.com/download-manager-files/BB-Canem-Latin-Glossary.pdf">Glossary</a></li>
    <li><a href="https://tprs-uploads.s3-accelerate.amazonaws.com/download-manager-files/BB-Canem-Latin-WebSPL.pdf">Preview</a></li>
  </ul>
</div>

Before I rant about some other books, I want to praise this Latin
translation of the famous *Brando Brown*, originally written in
Spanish by Carol Gaab, and translated into Latin last year by Justin
Slocum Bailey. The story has evidently been popular; you can also get
it in French, Italian, German, or Mandarin.

## The Physical Book

This is a 7x5 paperback. The story itself is 73 pages, the
glossary is 15, and the whole book is 96. The paper is cheap and soon
turns yellow, but is good enough for this sort of thing. The glue
seems sturdy.

## Format & Typography

There is not enough margin space at the sides for writing notes,
except at quotations. Between the lines, however, you will find
something more than an eighth of an inch, which might be enough for
you. There are mistakes here and there in the font; for example, the
long vowels in the table of contents are the wrong size. On top of
that, the whole thing is poorly laid out, and they used a sans serif
font. So please note, Fluency Matters: your books are ugly. On the
other hand, I know that most people don’t really care about these
things.

<!-- more -->

## Illustrations

<div class="example-image-wrapper">
  <img src="/images/brando-brown-park.png"
  class="illustration-example" />
  <p><em>Example Illustration</em></p>
</div>

The 66 illustrations do a good job showing the plot. They are plain
and simple drawings. They’re not really pretty, but not so disgusting
as in many books for education. I don’t understand why so many books
for kids are full of hideous pictures. Probably because Marxists came
up with a plan to corrupt the taste of American youth.

## Plot

Brandon Brown wants a dog for his fast-approaching ninth birthday. His
mother is hard to convince. But he finds a puppy in the park and hides
it in his room. Brando then has to pretend to be crazy to cover up the
rather obvious signs, so his mother takes him to a doctor, who says
that Brandon needs lots of sleep.

Fearing that he might not get to celebrate his birthday, he crawls out
the window and sneaks the dog back to the park, where a girl
recognizes it as her own and takes it. He then returns home and
convinces his mother that he is well enough to have a birthday party.
Since his family never knew about the dog, Brandon’s dad give him a
dog for his birthday. But by now he thinks that dogs are a real pain.

If you read my manifesto, you will perhaps say that I hate this story.
The characters are not deep or noble. It does not uplift the mind. So
why should we want it? Because the beginner’s brain works so hard
just in understanding what is going on in the story. ACTFL did have
the right idea when they said philosophy should be left to advanced
students. It would of course be nice if we could write uplifting
stories for new students; but in a way it is better and easier for
them to learn about home life in stories about home, so they can say
things about their own lives.

Besides that, this book has an actual plot. I have read so many
stories full of exploding elephants that now I am delighted with
anything that has a beginning, a middle, and an end, and where
everything happens according to the necessary and the probable.

## Latinity

As usual, “unsheltered grammar” is mostly applied to nouns and
adjectives, so we see all cases of various words in the first three
declensions, plus some forms of *res*, *dies*, and *domus*, including
the ablative and accusative of motion for the last. There is a bit of
partitive genitive, genitive of characteristic, ablatives of time and
instrument, accusatives of time, and a couple verbs that take the
dative. Pronouns are limited to a few forms of *ego*, *tu*, and *is*,
along with *quid* and some possessives; it does not have *hic*,
*iste*, or *ille* at all.

All verb conjugations, *velle*, *ire* *ferre*, and *esse* are
represented, mostly in infinitives and the present indicative active.
Passive endings do show up, but only in *loqui*, *loquitur*, and
*imitatur*. Participles and subjunctives are almost entirely absent.
On the other hand, the book is filled with gerundives, and it has a
decent number of future and perfect verb forms, including perfect
infinitives.

In terms of syntax, there is a surprising amount of sentence variety.
The word order does vary a bit, and a good number of sentences have
implied subjects. On the other hand, word order seems to be invariably
subject-object-verb or subject-verb-object. Complex sentences are
quite common; in these the dependent clause is usually an object
clause after a word like *velle* or *dicere*. Gerundives after *ad*
are very frequent.

The translator valued easy cognates over idiom and linguistic
precision quite a bit, and so used phrases like *cum silentio* instead
of *tacite*, *purum facere* instead of *purgare*, and *difficultas*
instead of *aerumna*. I am not convinced either way myself on whether
that is a good idea.

Apart from interjections, discourse particles are rare. I suppose that
is fine for this level, especially since the book is narrating a
series of events, although I do miss seeing *quidem* and *itaque*
scattered across the page.

Much of the book length comes from being extremely repetitive, in a
*Dick and Jane* sort of way.

Overall, it has some fairly complex grammar, and does not feel like it
will permanently ruin anyone’s sense of Latin idiom, apart from
perhaps encouraging students to use some relatively uncommon cognates
instead of the words that Lactantius would have used.

If we had about twenty more books like this, especially some that have
different grammatical constructions, we could just read them during
first year, then breeze through *Lingua Latina* the next to learn
grammar systematically and a bunch of important words, and be ready
for the Vulgate at the start of the third. Maybe in a few years.
